TowerBrook to Purchase True Religion Apparel for $835 Million

It’s a high-priced deal for high-priced denim.

True Religion Apparel, the designer jeans company, announced on Friday that it had agreed to be acquired by the private equity firm TowerBrook Capital Partners for about $835 million.

The purchase highlights the rise of premium-priced jeans as a high-fashion staple and status symbol. Over the last decade, a variety of brands, including 7 for All Mankind, Current/Elliott and J Brand have fueled the frenzy for that perfect pair of jeans, selling their wares for upward of $400.

A deal for True Religion has been anticipated since October, when the company announced it had retained the investment bank Guggenheim Securities to explore a possible sale. TowerBrook will pay $32 a share in cash, representing a roughly 9 percent premium to where the stock closed on Thursday. Its shares ended the day Friday at $31.82.

True Religion, which, like many of its competitors is based in Southern California, was among the fastest-growing of the jeans companies. It justifies its steep prices by using high-quality denim and workers who hand-finish the pants with unique stitching and patterns. Jeans also remain one of the few items of apparel still made in the United States, adding to the cost.

On True Religion’s Web site, a pair of women’s dark blue denim low-rise straight leg jeans was for sale for $343; cut-off jean shorts with vintage label patches retailed for $228.

The company was started in 2002 by Jeffrey Lubell and his former wife, Kym Gold. As a teenager growing up in Brooklyn, Mr. Lubell would bleach bell-bottoms and embellish jeans with leather and denim patches, according to True Religion’s Web site. He says of the company’s name: “There’s only one real religion and that’s people, and all the people in the world wear jeans.”

True Religion helped revive the market for designer jeans, which first flourished in the 1970s with popular brands like Calvin Klein and Gloria Vanderbilt. The company opened its first store in 2005 and now operates 124 in the United States and 31 outlets internationally.

In recent years, True Religion’s growth has slowed after a series of fashion missteps and as struggling consumers shied away from its fancy dungarees. Mr. Lubell stepped down as chief executive and creative director earlier this year after the board declined to renew his contract. According to securities filings, Mr. Lubell still owns about 600,000 shares of the company’s stock, worth about $19 million at current prices.

Rebecca Duval, a retail analyst at BlueFin Research Partners, said that now was a good time to refresh the brand, in part because of fall fashion trends embracing indigo-colored jeans. “We’re seeing a resurgence in denim, and the leading brands like True Religion will benefit from the increased demand,” she said.

TowerBrook, the private equity firm that is acquiring the company, has experience with upscale products. The firm once owned the luxury shoemaker Jimmy Choo, which it sold in 2011 to the German fashion company Labelux Group. TowerBrook was spun out from the investment firm Soros Fund Management in 2005. Its holdings include Rave Holdings, the movie theater chain, and the St. Louis Blues hockey franchise.

The firm, which recently raised a $3.5 billion fund, is lead by Ramez Sousou and Neal Moszkowski. The TowerBrook partner leading the True Religion deal, Andrew Rolfe, is a former president of Gap International and chief executive of Pret a Manger.

Several other private equity firms have also delved into denim. Berkshire Partners has a stake in the jeans maker Citizens for Humanity; Fireman Capital and Webster Capital own Hudson; and TSG Consumer Partners made an investment last year in Paige Denim.

“High-end denim is still a necessity in most women’s closets,” Ms. Duval, the retail analyst, said. 