Hedge Fund Manager And S.E.C. Reach Deal

When federal regulators sued the high-flying money manager Philip A. Falcone last summer, they claimed his actions “read like the final exam in a graduate school course in how to operate a hedge fund unlawfully.”

By Thursday, the agency appeared to be softening its tone.

Nearly a year after the Securities and Exchange Commission accused him of manipulating the market, using hedge fund assets to pay his own taxes and “secretly” favoring select customers at the expense of others, Mr. Falcone disclosed in a public filing that he had “reached an agreement in principle” to settle the two cases with the agency. The S.E.C. also struck a deal with Harbinger Capital Partners, Mr. Falcone’s flagship hedge fund.

The settlement, which came after a federal judge in New York questioned aspects of the cases, would be a moral victory of sorts for Mr. Falcone, who has stubbornly resisted a deal for more than a year. It might also reignite concerns that the S.E.C.’s results sometimes fall short of its ambitions.

The S.E.C.’s punishment of Mr. Falcone appeared steep, if only because it spelled an end to his long career as a hedge fund wizard. Mr. Falcone, who made a fortune betting against the subprime mortgage market in 2007, has agreed to at least a two-year ban from raising new capital, a death knell for a hedge fund manager. He must also “take all actions reasonably necessary to expeditiously” return money to investors who are fleeing the fund, according to the public filing on Thursday.

But with the exodus of capital, and a wireless venture that he bankrolled in bankruptcy, Mr. Falcone’s hedge fund was already resigned to its fate. And the fine print of the S.E.C. deal suggests that Mr. Falcone, who is not required to admit or deny the agency’s accusations, could escape relatively unscathed.

“The settlement, itself, would change very little in Falcone’s life,” said Erik Gordon, a professor of law and of business at the University of Michigan.

For one, the deal comes with an $18 million penalty from the S.E.C. — a rounding error to a hedge fund billionaire. Mr. Falcone will personally pay $4 million of the penalty, according to people briefed on the matter, while the fund’s management company will pay the rest. One of the people briefed on the matter noted that $18 million was higher than what Mr. Falcone initially offered to pay and was a substantial sum given that the hedge fund’s investors did not suffer any financial harm.

Still, the two-year ban comes with a loophole. According to the people briefed on the matter, the ban does not apply to the nine investment advisers that Mr. Falcone runs through Harbinger Capital. The S.E.C. granted the carve-out, the people said, so Mr. Falcone could unwind the hedge fund without harming investors by selling off pieces at fire-sale prices.

More important, perhaps, Mr. Falcone can retain his control of the Harbinger Group, a publicly traded conglomerate that he uses to make a broad array of investments. In recent years, Mr. Falcone has started to emerge as something of a private equity investor, taking varied stakes in the insurance business and consumer goods industry, including the company that produces the George Foreman grill. That business remains largely unaffected by the S.E.C. deal.

The settlement, the people said, is also notable for something that it did not include: a common provision that prohibits defendants from committing future violations with fraudulent intent.

The lack of a so-called fraud injunction, an unusual victory for the target of an S.E.C. action, is a reminder of broader concerns about the toughness of the agency. During the tenure of Robert Khuzami, the former enforcement chief of the S.E.C. who filed major cases against Wall Street firms, the agency came under scrutiny for not leveling bigger fines. He notably butted heads with a federal judge in New York, Jed S. Rakoff, who in 2010 called the agency’s $150 million settlement with Bank of America over lax public disclosures “half-baked justice at best.”

Now that the S.E.C. is in transition under a new chairwoman, Mary Jo White, the agency is vowing once again to strike a hard line against financial fraud.

An S.E.C. spokesman declined to discuss the terms of the settlement with Mr. Falcone, given that approval of the agency’s commissioners is still required. Mr. Falcone’s lawyer, Matthew S. Dontzin, also declined to comment.

The settlement emerged after earlier attempts at a deal came up short. Mr. Falcone, the people briefed on the matter said, refused to settle last year as long as the S.E.C. insisted on applying an injunction against fraud, which would amount to something of a rebuke. In June, the S.E.C. held its ground, deciding to file its cases instead.

But then the S.E.C. received a warning sign from Judge Paul Crotty, who at a hearing in February declared that in one part of a case: “I’m having difficulty seeing exactly where the wrong occurred here.”