A Humbled Kleiner Perkins Adjusts Its Strategy

During the dot-com boom, Kleiner Perkins Caufield & Byers, the venture capital investment firm, all but minted money, making prescient early investments in Netscape Communications, Amazon.com and Google and delivering astonishing returns to investors. Along the way, it became a symbol of Silicon Valley.

But the firm has hit a rough patch over the last decade, frustrated by unsuccessful forays into clean technology and by a catch-up effort to take later-stage stakes in social media companies.

Kleiner has held a series of status-report meetings with its outside investors this year, acknowledging that recent fund performance “wasn’t great,” one attendee said. “They really believed green tech was going to be the next big technology wave,” this investor added.

Kleiner has also cut some management fees and reorganized its investment approach, eliminating three “silos” that separated teams making investments in clean technology, health care and technology. The firm has added more investing partners with digital expertise, like the former Twitter executive Mike Abbott, after it missed the early window on hot media start-ups like Facebook and Twitter and jumped in later at higher valuations.

A spokeswoman for Kleiner, which manages $7 billion, said the firm’s partners declined to comment.

The latest setback is the fading fortunes of Fisker Automotive, the green-car start-up backed by Kleiner that has laid off much of its work force and hired bankruptcy advisers.

At a Congressional hearing last month, Republican members of a House oversight committee asked witnesses from Fisker and the Energy Department whether Democratic political contributions and influence of Kleiner partners, led by the Obama adviser John Doerr, had helped Fisker gain $192 million in government green-energy loans.

While the questions were clearly partisan, the spotlight on Kleiner added a new level of public criticism to a reputational injury that has been building for several years, denting Kleiner’s status as one of the top technology venture capital firms.

Some experts predict Fisker could become one of the biggest venture-capital losses ever. Fisker has raised $1.1 billion in venture financing, the most for any clean-technology start-up, compared with $848 million for Solyndra, the solar-panel maker that filed for bankruptcy in 2011, according to the Cleantech Group, which tracks such investments.

Kleiner investors say that three venture funds the firm raised in 1994, 1996 and 1999 — which contained Juniper Networks, Amazon and Google — delivered staggering returns. The 1994 fund delivered 32 times the investors’ money, the 1996 fund 17 times, and 1999, six times. But since then, they note, funds raised in 2000 and 2004 have been unprofitable. A $1 billion fund raised in 2008 devoted to clean technology is also showing losses, one investor says.

“They had stellar returns for years, but their reputation has been tarnished by performance of late,” said Nancy Lambert, a former private banker at Citigroup who is now an independent adviser to wealthy families and foundations. “It doesn’t seem like investors are turning away, they’re just more cautious.”

Kleiner’s investors have included top universities like Harvard and Yale, the Ford Foundation and certain venture capital funds-of-funds.

The firm’s reputation was also dented last year when a junior partner, Ellen Pao, filed a sex discrimination lawsuit. She contended that the firm improperly retaliated against her after she complained about being pressured into a sexual relationship by a colleague, resulting in lower compensation and poor performance reviews.

Kleiner has denied all the claims and said that it chose not to promote her based on valid “performance concerns.”

The shift in Kleiner’s fortunes is emblematic of the venture capital business as a whole, where the titanic returns from the late-1990s dot-com bubble have ebbed, and investor dollars flowing into new funds have slowed as well.

“The days of huge returns in venture are long gone,” said Scott Ryles, a longtime Silicon Valley banker who has led two Kleiner-backed companies.

Venture funds returned 35.7 percent annually in the decade ending in 2000, but they lost 1.9 percent annually in the decade ending in 2010, according to data compiled by Cambridge Associates for the National Venture Capital Association.

As a result, annual commitments to venture funds have fallen from $56.1 billion in the four years ending in 2001, to $17.3 billion in the four years ending in 2012, according to Thomson Reuters data compiled by the association.

Founded in 1972, Kleiner scored big early returns on Tandem Computers, a maker of processors used by banks and brokerage firms, and Genentech, the biotechnology start-up whose initial public offering electrified the stock market in 1980. The firm cashed in on a spate of hot Internet offerings, led by Netscape and Amazon, during the dot-com bubble.
