Hedge Fund Impresario Plays Host In Las Vegas

LAS VEGAS — Just outside the grand ballroom at the Bellagio hotel early Wednesday morning, Anthony Scaramucci, the backslapping host of the country’s largest hedge fund conference, spotted Gregory J. Fleming, president of Morgan Stanley Investment Management and one of Mr. Scaramucci’s most important business relationships.

“Is your kid still in town? Does he want to meet Train?” Mr. Scaramucci asked, referring to the adult-contemporary rock band performing at the event. “It’s great to have you here; it really means a lot to me.”

The hedge fund faithful, more than 1,800 strong, have come here for the SkyBridge Alternatives Conference, or SALT. Held over four days, SALT is a Wall Street schmooze-fest. This year’s lineup of speakers features the investors Daniel S. Loeb and John Paulson, the politicians Nicolas Sarkozy and Leon Panetta, and the entertainers Oliver Stone and Al Pacino.

It is also a matchmaking service, with funds peddling their services to the world’s richest investors, and the world’s richest investors seeking out the next superstar manager. And this being Sin City, it is, perhaps above all else, a good time.

The ringmaster of this spectacle is Mr. Scaramucci, a Goldman Sachs alumnus with a Harvard Law degree whom many simply call “the Mooch.” In an industry known for reclusive traders and math geeks, the boyish Mr. Scaramucci, 49, is Wall Street’s first hedge fund impresario, a P. T. Barnum in a Ferragamo tie. In a gilded industry that has preferred to stay below the radar, Mr. Scaramucci embraces the white-hot center of it all.

A relentless self-promoter, Mr. Scaramucci is ubiquitous, especially to the stock traders and market aficionados who stare all day at Bloomberg terminals and have their flat screens fixed to business television.

He appears regularly on CNBC, jawboning about stocks. He wedged his way into a cameo in Mr. Stone’s 2010 sequel to the movie “Wall Street.” He has written two books: the first, “Goodbye Gordon Gekko,” is part memoir, part self-help manual about “how to find your fortune without losing your soul”; the second, “The Little Book of Hedge Funds,” is a primer on the investment vehicles that have made him rich.

“Mutual funds are the propeller plane,” writes Mr. Scaramucci in his primer, “while hedge funds are the fighter jets.”

That analogy has not worked well lately. The ascent of SALT, and Mr. Scaramucci, comes in a challenging time for hedge funds, which are expensive investment vehicles that promise outsize returns in up and down markets. The explosive growth experienced by the industry a decade ago has plateaued. For four consecutive years, the average hedge fund has failed to beat the Standard & Poor’s 500-stock index.

Despite the weak performance, hedge funds, which have a total of about $2.5 trillion in assets, are still attracting money, taking in $15.2 billion in the first quarter of this year, according to Hedge Fund Research.

The SALT crowd can thank the Federal Reserve’s persistent near-zero interest rate policy for their continued good fortune. Managers are also seeing money flood into debt-trading strategies as the world’s largest banks have retrenched from those risky investments under greater regulation.

Tepid industry performance cannot stop Mr. Scaramucci, whose irrepressible salesmanship seeks to elevate the SkyBridge Capital brand. A manager of a portfolio of hedge funds — a “fund of funds,” in Wall Street lingo — the New York-based firm has about $4.6 billion under management. It also oversees another roughly $3 billion in a business that advises pensions and other large institutions on hedge-fund-manager selection.

Mr. Scaramucci has built SkyBridge on the belief that hedge funds are not just the domain of giant pension funds and the Forbes 400 list of the wealthiest Americans.

SkyBridge’s flagship product is structured for “the mass affluent,” requiring a net worth of $1 million and a minimum investment of $25,000. Sold through brokers at big banks like Morgan Stanley and Merrill Lynch, SkyBridge has more than 24,000 clients. A typical customer is a dentist with a million or two in the bank and a desire to spice up his or her portfolio with a dollop of hedge fund exposure.

“I’m a middle-class kid from Long Island, and neither of my parents went to college,” said Mr. Scaramucci, a father of three who grew up in Port Washington, N.Y., and now lives just a couple of miles away in Manhasset. “Why shouldn’t more people have access to this industry?”

The access doesn’t come cheap. On top of the usual 2 percent management fee and a 20 percent cut of the profits charged annually by the hedge funds in SkyBridge’s portfolio, the firm adds a 1.5 percent yearly fee, along with a one-time placement charge paid to the broker that runs as high as 3 percent.

Not everyone buys what Mr. Scaramucci is selling. Critics decry the hefty fees that they say eat into the performance of funds of funds.
