Former University of Oklahoma Student Apologizes for Racist Chant
OKLAHOMA CITY — A former University of Oklahoma student captured on video leading a racist chant apologized Wednesday, saying he was sorry for his role in the incident and ashamed that he participated.

The words in the chant “were mean, hateful and racist,” said the former student, Levi Pettit, who was surrounded by African-American community leaders at the Fairview Missionary Baptist Church here.

“Some have wondered why I hadn’t spoken out publicly,” Mr. Pettit said. “The truth is I have had a mix of pain, shame, sorrow and fear over the consequences of my actions. I did not want to apologize to the press or to the whole country until I first came to apologize to those most directly impacted.”

“The truth is what was said in that chant is disgusting,” Mr. Pettit said, “and after meeting with these people, I’ve learned these words should never be repeated.”

He deflected questions about where he learned the chant and instead spoke about asking for forgiveness and trying to work within the community to help prevent racism.

The videos in March, taken while Sigma Alpha Epsilon fraternity members and their dates rode a bus to a formal event, showed young white people singing a song laden with anti-black slurs and at least one reference to lynching.

Mr. Pettit, who grew up in the Dallas area, and another fraternity member, Parker Rice, were expelled by the university president, David L. Boren. The fraternity was closed by the national chapter of Sigma Alpha Epsilon, and Mr. Boren ordered the students to leave the fraternity house. Mr. Pettit’s parents later issued an apology for their son, and Mr. Rice apologized for his actions in a statement to The Associated Press.

On Wednesday, Mr. Pettit also read a letter that he had written to Mr. Boren regarding his actions in leading the chant.

Isaac Hill, president of the university’s black student association, who met with Mr. Pettit before the news conference, said he believed that Mr. Pettit had been changed by the national attention caused by the video. Mr. Hill and other African-American leaders said they had accepted the apology and believed that Mr. Pettit was sincere.

Wednesday’s event was organized after Mr. Pettit contacted State Senator Anastasia Pittman, chairwoman of Oklahoma’s Legislative Black Caucus. An executive assistant for Ms. Pittman, Trena Byas, said the meeting would help the university and the community start healing.

An investigation into other Sigma Alpha Epsilon members is continuing, a university spokesman said.