Indiana Declares Health Emergency After H.I.V. Outbreak
An outbreak of H.I.V. in southeastern Indiana prompted the governor on Thursday to declare a public health emergency as officials worked to stop the spread of the virus that causes AIDS.

Officials said that 71 cases of H.I.V. identified since mid-December have been traced to intravenous use of a prescription painkiller in Scott County north of Louisville, Ky. Nine more cases are still under investigation, and state health officials predicted that more would appear in coming weeks. The governor authorized a short-term exchange program that would provide drug users with access to sterile needles so that contaminated needles were less likely to be shared.

Gov. Mike Pence, a Republican, has long opposed such programs. But he said that the outbreak, which was first identified in late January, had reached epidemic proportions, justifying the action. “This is all hands on deck,” Mr. Pence said. “This is a very serious situation.”

Mr. Pence’s order, which is in effect for 30 days, would allow for a needle-exchange program within Scott County if one is requested by local officials.

Scott County has about 24,000 residents, 19 percent of whom live below the poverty line, a rate higher than the state average. Mr. Pence said that Scott County typically sees about five new cases of H.I.V. a year.

The governor said the cluster of cases diagnosed so far had been traced to intravenous drug use, with the virus most likely spreading as people shared infected needles. He said those infected had illegally used Opana, a powerful prescription pain medication prescribed only in pill form. Opana is marketed by Endo Pharmaceuticals as a long-acting formulation of oxymorphone. It is prescribed less frequently than oxycodone and hydrocodone because of its strength. When used illicitly, it can provide a potent high.

“Once you alter it and inject it, it’s no longer extended-release,” said Dr. Melinda Campopiano, a medical officer at the federal Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration. “It is much quicker.”

Allowing clinics and other entities to dispense sterile syringes in exchange for used ones has long been debated. Proponents, including the White House Office of National Drug Control Policy and the federal Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, say such programs can impede the spread of infectious diseases like H.I.V. and hepatitis C. Opponents say they may encourage illegal drug use.

United States law prohibits federal funding of needle-exchange programs. About half of states, generally those that are politically conservative, have banned the practice, according to the North American Syringe Exchange Network, which tracks state policies.

Mr. Pence has supported Indiana’s ban, but after meeting with federal advisers he said he decided to “make an exception” and allow a temporary program in Scott County.

“I’m going to put the lives of the people of Indiana first,” Mr. Pence said. He later added: “It’s a commitment to law and order, but it’s a commitment to compassion.”

The state will establish a command center in Scott County, with a task force of state agencies and a mobile enrollment facility for Indiana’s Medicaid program, which covers H.I.V. testing and treatment.

“The sooner we get people who may have been exposed, by whatever means, in this region, in for testing, in for treatment, the sooner that we will also suppress the spread of this virus,” Mr. Pence said.

Dr. Jerome M. Adams, the state health commissioner, said his department had been working in Scott County after H.I.V. diagnoses began to surge in January. He said public health workers have had limited success locating and testing those at risk of infection.

“Scott County is a rural area,” Dr. Adams said. “It’s also a very close-knit area. When you’re identified, the whole town knows. There’s a feeling of hopelessness within this community. They’re addicted, and they’re getting H.I.V. because they’re addicted.”

Misuse of prescription opioids has become a national concern, with more than 16,000 deaths attributed to it in 2013, according to the C.D.C. The Scott County coroner, Jerry Buchanan, said in a telephone interview on Thursday that his office had handled 11 fatal drug overdoses since 2013, one caused by Opana.

Mr. Pence said: “I have deep compassion for people who have been trapped by this addiction, and we want to make sure people know they’re not alone. There is help, there is treatment and we’re surging into the county now to make that available.”