Warren Buffett and 3G May Have One Barrier to Even Bigger Deals
Warren Buffett and 3G Capital have created a fearsome merger and acquisition machine. The deal on Wednesday to merge the consumer food giants Kraft and H.J. Heinz, worth some $80 billion, is the boldest collaboration yet between the Sage of Omaha and the Brazilian investors behind Anheuser-Busch InBev, after earlier swoops on Heinz and Tim Hortons. The only barrier to even bigger deals may be 3G’s capacity for new projects.

Mr. Buffett and 3G are uncommonly patient investors. He can write huge checks, amplifying his Brazilian cohorts’ firepower, while they know how to run consumer companies. The partners came up with $17 billion of equity and preferred shares to take the ketchup maker Heinz private in 2013. At the time, Breakingviews calculations suggested that it could take a decade for the investment to make a decent return.

Now, they are chipping in $10 billion of equity to merge Heinz with the maker of Velveeta cheese in another deal that could tie up their capital for years. Mr. Buffett told CNBC that his company, Berkshire Hathaway, “will be in this stock forever.” That’s a level of commitment that few, if any, rivals can match.

Mr. Buffett is known for taking a hands-off approach with Berkshire’s portfolio companies. The original three men behind 3G — the former bankers Jorge Paulo Lemann, Carlos Alberto Sicupira and Marcel Telles — relish getting their hands dirty. They have been steeped in the consumer businesses since 1989, when they bought the sleepy Brazilian brewery that they would eventually turn into the $200 billion beer giant AB InBev. At Heinz, they have raised the margin of earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation and amortization by 44 percent in two years by closing weak brands and forcing business units to justify budgets from scratch.

Such operational acumen can make all the difference. Just ask the investor Edward S. Lampert, who has presided over billions of dollars of value destruction at Sears over the last decade. In the food business, only Nelson Peltz, the billionaire raider turned activist best known for pushing for breakups at companies like Cadbury and Kraft, may come close to matching 3G’s commercial acumen.

Put it all together, and the result is a deal-making juggernaut. Merging Kraft and Heinz will take up 3G’s attention for some time. When they are ready, though, Mr. Buffett will be, too. PepsiCo, whose market capitalization is $140 billion, or Coca-Cola, whose market capitalization is $176 billion — and whose biggest shareholder is Berkshire — would do well to take note.