Jeb Bush Returns to the Washington Fund-Raising Well
WASHINGTON — “I’m not an expert on the ways of Washington,” Jeb Bush told conservatives last month when he was asked about a funding dispute in Congress.

Mr. Bush, the former Florida governor, has sounded that theme regularly in his fledgling presidential campaign. But even as he positions himself as a Washington outsider, he seems to have mastered a skill that is crucial in this city: tapping into the money-raising clout of the K Street lobbyists, political operatives, superlawyers and business leaders in Washington’s permanent class.

Although not yet an official presidential candidate, Mr. Bush has had at least seven private fund-raisers and meet-and-greets in the Washington area, raising more than $1.3 million for his political action committee in a single day last month, and he has scheduled another one in April. His success is hardly surprising: For more than two decades, Washington has provided Mr. Bush, the son and brother of former presidents, with financial and political support.

“Washington is a deep well for Jeb. There’s a lot of support for him here,” said Tony Fratto, a Washington consultant who worked at the White House under George W. Bush, Mr. Bush’s brother, and pitched in $5,000 for a Bush fund-raiser last month.

In his two successful runs for the Florida Statehouse, in 1998 and 2002, Mr. Bush received at least $237,000 from hundreds of lobbyists, lawyers, political consultants and others in the capital, records show. Many donors had ties to his father and his brother or to special interests like tobacco, oil, Hollywood and Wall Street.

Now he is far outpacing potential Republican rivals who have largely been absent from the capital’s chicken-and-chardonnay fund-raising scene.

In two months of aggressive fund-raising, Mr. Bush has turned to a number of longtime associates in Washington who received his help on state matters when he was governor of Florida.

Tim Miller, a spokesman for Mr. Bush, declined to say how much the campaign had raised in Washington or anywhere else, but he predicted that “the vast, vast majority” of the contributions would come from outside the capital.

“You’re going to raise money wherever you have people that want to engage with him,” Mr. Miller said.

Mr. Bush’s political action committee, the Right to Rise PAC, and a sister “super PAC” of the same name are not required to disclose the donations they have received until July. But the effort is expected to smash the $42 million that Mitt Romney raised nationwide during the primaries en route to the Republican nomination for the White House in 2012.

An evening fund-raiser Mr. Bush attended Feb. 17 in McLean, Va., at the home of a top Republican lawyer, Jamie Wareham, raised more than $1 million — twice what organizers predicted, people with knowledge of the event said. Despite a snowstorm, nearly 200 people turned out, with some paying up to $25,000 for a photo with Mr. Bush.

Earlier that day, Mr. Bush appeared at a luncheon fund-raiser at the offices of BGR, one of Washington’s top Republican lobbying shops.

Emails from Mr. Bush’s time as governor of Florida show that Mr. Griffith also lobbied him in 2005 on behalf of a corporate client, United Healthcare, urging the state to put up for bid a major contract to provide state employee health insurance. Mr. Bush thanked him and told him that an aide would be in touch, according to the emails. The contract was later put out for bid, but United Healthcare did not get it.

Last month, Mr. Griffith was again helping Mr. Bush, this time as a fund-raiser. The event he hosted raised $300,000, a BGR spokesman said, with Republican consultants, lobbyists, lawyers and other guests paying up to $10,000 to meet Mr. Bush and hear a preview of a foreign policy talk he gave the next day in Chicago.

In addition to Mr. Griffith, at least eight other supporters are now raising money for Mr. Bush in Washington after seeking his help as governor on Florida business developments, tourism and other issues, emails and donor records show.

While Mr. Bush’s financial support from big-name Washington figures will no doubt help fuel his campaign, it could also complicate his frequent efforts to position himself as a Washington outsider unschooled in its ways.

In a recent speech in Detroit, Mr. Bush promised listeners “a new vision, a plan of action that is different than what we have been hearing in Washington, D.C.”

He has cast politicians in the capital as a breed apart. Washington, he said, is “a company town, and the company is government. It’s all they know.”

“He is not a creature of Washington,” said Dirk Van Dongen, who leads the National Association of Wholesaler-Distributors in Washington and has already raised $10,000 for Mr. Bush’s committee. “He’s never held federal office — elected or appointed — so his experience is as a non-Washington leader.”

In January, two weeks after Mr. Bush announced his interest in the White House, Mr. Van Dongen arranged back-to-back sessions for him to meet with Washington business leaders at a conference table at his trade group’s Washington office. Some 80 executives in all from the U.S. Chamber of Commerce, Microsoft, Google and other national trade groups and corporations showed up, and a number of them followed up with donations to Mr. Bush’s committee.

Mr. Van Dongen said he personally expected to match or exceed the $1.4 million he raised for Mr. Romney in the 2012 election cycle.

That Mr. Bush came to Washington so early in his prospective candidacy was a sign of how Washington donors and supporters factor into his strategy, Mr. Van Dongen said. “Folks in town very much appreciated this,” he said.

Mr. Bush’s blitz of fund-raisers in big-money cities like Washington, New York, Chicago and Palm Springs, Calif., appears aimed at “blowing away his competitors” in the race for money and establishing himself as the candidate to beat, said Palmer Gibbs, who tracks fund-raising events at the Sunlight Foundation, a Washington nonprofit group that promotes transparency in government.

“He’s hanging out with D.C. lobbyists and these very wealthy people who can write those huge checks, and it’s part of his attempt to raise huge amounts of money very, very early on in the race,” Ms. Gibbs said.

Not all of Mr. Bush’s events have been priced for the uber-rich, however. A fund-raiser last month in Washington targeting younger Republicans required a contribution of as little as $50 to get in.

Unlike at the pricier fund-raisers, however, the guests did not get to meet Mr. Bush, but instead met his son Jeb Bush Jr., who stressed efforts to appeal to younger voters, women and minorities.

Fritz Brogan, who worked in the White House under Mr. Bush’s brother, donated the space for the event at a restaurant he owns in Washington’s Dupont Circle, serving chips and guacamole and raising about $50,000 in all, he said.

Mr. Brogan is supporting Mr. Bush in other ways as well.

Before Mr. Bush’s appearance at last month’s Conservative Political Action Conference in Oxon Hill, Md., Mr. Brogan wanted to make sure his supporters were well represented. So he contacted Mr. Bush’s committee to help arrange chartered buses and sent out emails urging supporters to get there early to claim seats.

While Mr. Bush was met with boos from some conservative critics and Tea Party members at the event, Mr. Brogan and other supporters cheered him on.