A Fight to Save Pieces of the Past in a Reshaping Phoenix Enclave
PHOENIX — Inside a worn-down building on the edge of downtown, a rambling mural that covered nearly the length of one wall looked like something a traveling artist might have painted for the sole purpose of settling a bar tab — as many here suspect was the case.

The 65-year-old mural, a tribute to alcohol, depicted guards armed with shotguns overseeing a still; women hovering like ghosts, a glass in each hand; and a dancer with one leg raised high, bloomers in full view. Even to the best-trained eye, it did not look like much. But the work represented a rare link to its creator, Ted DeGrazia, a wildly prolific artist born when Arizona was just a territory, whose career followed a trajectory that in many ways paralleled the ascent of the region that served as his muse.

Just as Mr. DeGrazia’s legacy faded after his death in 1982, the mural, along with a smaller one in the same building, was largely ignored for years. But the murals began to draw attention recently when the building was condemned to make way for new construction. The developer plans to turn the site into a luxury apartment complex, loaded with amenities like a fitness center, a pool and rooftop decks with sweeping views to entice the millennials who have been flocking to the city’s downtown.

Ted DeGrazia, who painted the mural and specialized in depicting the American Southwest, died in 1982. Credit DeGrazia Foundation
In the district here known as Roosevelt Row, an eclectic enclave where neglected warehouses have been transformed into art galleries and bungalows into bookshops, this shoe box of a building, adorned with a trio of colorful birds on an outer wall, long fit right in. Threatened with its loss, longtime residents mobilized, determined to keep out what they saw as an outside business trying to capitalize on their neighborhood’s homegrown appeal.

The building, which served over the years as one of the city’s first drag clubs and years later as the headquarters for a mayor’s re-election campaigns, was an artifact well worth saving, said Bob Diehl, a neighborhood resident who started a petition to block demolition.

“We have to stop destroying history in order to put up boring stuff,” Mr. Diehl said. “We’re replacing interesting, funky urban stuff with dead sidewalks.”

The developer, Baron Properties of Denver, talked with the DeGrazia Foundation, which oversees the artist’s gallery in Tucson, about preserving the murals and determined that moving the larger painting, on plaster and drywall affixed directly to brick, would be next to impossible. Still, there was hope that the smaller mural, of a woman twirling over a coupe glass, could be saved.

In his long career, Mr. DeGrazia painted an untold number of murals across the state, most of which have vanished, either under coats of paint or through wear and tear. “It’s one of the few left,” Lance Laber, executive director of the DeGrazia Foundation, said of the larger painting here.

“I don’t think it’s the most important work he ever did,” Mr. Laber added, “but it is part of his body of work.”

In the 1950s, Mr. DeGrazia’s work was published frequently in Arizona Highways magazine, and his popularity soared in 1960 when Unicef reproduced “Los Niños,” his painting of a circle of children holding hands, on a greeting card that sold millions. As Arizona transformed from desolate and distant into a destination, his vivacious and colorful scenes of Native American life and the Southwest captured the region’s appeal.

Continue reading the main storyContinue reading the main storyContinue reading the main story
“I grew up in the Southwest and grew up seeing these images everywhere, on tiles, on cards — I swear, on paper plates,” said Jerry N. Smith, a curator at the Phoenix Art Museum who oversees works of the American West. “I never cared for the work. I knew the Southwest was nothing like that.”

But he conceded that Mr. DeGrazia’s work had a unique resonance. “I’m surprised by how happy people get when they talk about it,” Mr. Smith said. “There’s a certain charm that some people really enjoy.”

The charm was amplified by a biography that seemed like the stuff of Old West lore. After spending part of his childhood in Italy, Mr. DeGrazia started first grade here at 16, graduated from high school at 23 and went on to earn a master’s degree. He finagled his way into a rarefied corner of the art world by becoming an apprentice and protégé to the Mexican painter Diego Rivera, only to see whatever reputation he had gained in that community fizzle into irrelevance, even disdain, as he achieved commercial success.

Later in life, he made national headlines when he burned a collection of his original work — valued at over $1 million at the time — in protest of the federal inheritance tax.

“In the academic world of art history, he’s not really taken seriously,” said Olivia Miller, curator of exhibitions and education at the University of Arizona Museum of Art. Critics have described his depiction of Native Americans as idyllic and ignorant about the serious issues faced by his subjects. Others thought he showed little stylistic evolution or versatility.

“It’s almost like he found out what would sell and stuck with that style,” Ms. Miller said.

James W. Johnson, who wrote a biography of DeGrazia, said he had called himself “the artist of the people.”

“He said he didn’t care about what the art snobs said,” Mr. Johnson said. “I think he did — otherwise he wouldn’t have cared so much about his legacy.”

This month, options began running out for the DeGrazia murals in Phoenix.

City officials looked into declaring the building historically significant, but said they lacked enough justification to do so. (In any case, they said, the designation would have applied only to the exterior of the building, and not the murals inside.) The developer ruled out incorporating the aging structure into the new project or moving it.

“We certainly appreciate that there are members of the community who are passionate about their community,” said Scott Fisher, a principal partner of Baron Properties. “That is one of the reasons we are attracted to this area. We want to be part of the community and enhance the landscape.”

To that end, Mr. Fisher said art would be incorporated into the 111-unit development, including an updated version of the outdoor bird mural by Lauren Lee, who painted the original.

So the building was fenced off, and one morning last week, a backhoe clawed into the bricks until it was reduced to rubble.

During the effort this month to save the smaller mural, Mr. Laber of the DeGrazia Foundation saw that preservation was not meant to be. On a Sunday afternoon, a moving truck parked outside the building, ready to carry the mural to Tucson. In hours of painstaking work, careful slices were made along the sides of the painting. At last, it was pulled from the wall that had been its perch for decades and set gently on the floor, where in an instant it crumbled to dust.