In the Senate, a Day of Votes That Don’t Count
WASHINGTON — Senator Orrin G. Hatch, Republican of Utah, wants to make sure children do not munch edible marijuana. Senator David Vitter, Republican of Louisiana, wants to prevent “Washington elites” from forcing Americans to give up their paper dollar bills and use coins like Europeans.

Senator Dean Heller, Republican of Nevada, would allow open season on the sage grouse or, more specifically, development on the bird’s habitat, while Senator John Thune, Republican of South Dakota, would like federal protection for the beleaguered northern long-eared bat.

The “vote-orama” has begun, and with night falling Thursday, there is no end in sight.

In one of those dubious traditions of the upper chamber of Congress, the Senate has opened its well to an unlimited number of amendments to the budget blueprint for the coming fiscal year.

Some are politically freighted. Some are parochial. Some are serious. Some are not.

But none of them are binding, even if they are collectively time consuming. The Senate is likely to stay in session through the night, finally voting on the budget by dawn. At last count, 739 amendments had been introduced for consideration. Not all will be voted on, but the tally may grow.

“From a legal standpoint, it’s a total charade,” said Senator Richard Blumenthal, Democrat of Connecticut. “On the other hand, these are real votes. Senators do have to take positions on very significant policy issues.”

Asked what the point of the “vote-orama” is, Senator Mitch McConnell of Kentucky, the majority leader, paused, then laughed and walked away.

The term officially entered the Senate lexicon in 1977, according to the Senate historian’s office. By 2009, it had become a near parody, prompting a hearing to demand changes. At that time, Democratic and Republican Budget Committee leaders lamented a process that had gone horribly, laughably bad. In 2006, senators submitted 87 amendments. In 2007, there were 91, in 2008, 113.

The last one, in 2013, had more than 500. The two-year budget agreement that year between Senator Patty Murray, Democrat of Washington, and Representative Paul D. Ryan, Republican of Wisconsin, offered a reprieve.

The Senate unanimously approved an amendment by Senator Tom Cotton, Republican of Arkansas, to prevent the United Nations or any other international institution from acting to the detriment of Israel. But a motion by Ms. Murray to lift strict spending limits on defense and domestic programs over the next two days was rejected on party lines. Never mind that some Republicans — including Senators John McCain of Arizona and Lindsey Graham of South Carolina — say they want to do just that.

Senator Marco Rubio, Republican of Florida and a possible presidential candidate, moved to raise military spending without paying for it. He was rebuffed, 32-68. One potential rival for the Republican presidential nomination, Senator Rand Paul of Kentucky, followed suit with an amendment to raise military spending as well, but to pay for it, in large part, with deep cuts to foreign aid. His amendment won only four votes. (The four were Mr. Paul, Mr. McConnell, Mr. Vitter and Senator Michael B. Enzi, Republican of Wyoming and the Budget Committee chairman.)

Continue reading the main storyContinue reading the main storyContinue reading the main story
“Marco, I trust his judgment on national security matters, Rand Paul not so much,” said Mr. Graham, yet another possible Republican presidential hopeful.
Five Republicans did support Senator Bernard Sanders, independent of Vermont, and his amendment recognizing the reality of global climate change. It failed anyway.

But a bipartisan majority voted for Ms. Murray’s amendment to attach paid sick leave to the budget. That does not make it law, nor does it guarantee another vote this year, but Ms. Murray claimed the win.

An amendment by Senator Barbara A. Mikulski, Democrat of Maryland, to ensure equal pay for women failed, 45-54. However, an amendment by Senator Deb Fischer of Nebraska to ensure equal pay for women passed, 56-43, but she is a Republican, and her party has the votes.

Through it all, the button-down Senate abandoned its formal air. Senators mingled with constituents and lobbyists. A small army of disease-research advocates had descended on the Capitol, snapping photographs in the Senate’s ornate Reception Room, which, like much of the Capitol, is under renovation. Jeff Zients, director of President Obama’s National Economic Council, darted in and out of the Senate cloakroom.

Aides shuttled paper, as if the endless stream of amendments actually carried the force of law. By 4:10 p.m., Senator John Boozman, Republican of Arkansas, pronounced, “I’m already tired,” before promising to rally for the night shift. Twenty minutes later, tubs of Rocklands barbecue were wheeled into the Mansfield Room off the Senate chamber for a bipartisan meal, courtesy of Mr. McConnell.

Chaos? “Yes, that would be a good description,” said Senator Susan Collins, Republican of Maine.

Amid the hubbub, lawmakers were forced to take some time to actually read the amendments on which they were casting votes. Mr. Blumenthal said, for instance, one of Mr. Vitter’s myriad amendments ostensibly was supposed to gut Common Core, the federal and state education standards. But, Mr. Blumenthal said, the fine print also noted the defunding of “any other specific standards,” a far broader attack on the federal role in elementary and secondary education.

“It’s tricky,” Mr. Blumenthal said.

It passed nonetheless, again on the strength of Republican votes.

No word yet on how Mr. Vitter was defining “Washington elites,” those coin-loving, paper-hating bureaucrats with designs on American wallets.

So looking at an all-nighter, senators were forced to ask themselves, “Is this all worth it?”

“Yeah,” Mr. Rubio said. “If good amendments pass, that means something.”