Thousands Protest Plan to Oust University Chief in Mississippi
OXFORD, Miss. — Raising handwritten signs and clutching scripts for protest chants, more than 2,500 people on Wednesday demonstrated at the University of Mississippi to resist last week’s unexpected decision to oust the school’s chancellor, Daniel W. Jones.

In what officials here described as one of the largest protests in the university’s history, students, employees and other supporters of Dr. Jones criticized the plan to change leaders as wrapped in secrecy and threatening to the future of a place that has often been central to the image of this state.

Dr. Jones, who became the school’s chief executive in 2009, had won acclaim for his work to move the university away from the shadow of the racial unrest that tarnished the campus in 1962. The university, on a campus studded with magnolia trees and Georgian buildings known as Ole Miss, posted a record enrollment of nearly 23,100 students last fall, and Dr. Jones has been praised for helping to upgrade its academic and cultural credentials. 

But Mississippi’s higher education commissioner, Jim Borsig, announced Friday that the university’s governing board had decided not to renew Dr. Jones’s contract before its September expiration. The panel later said that Dr. Jones, 66, who returned to work at the university’s main campus on March 16 after months of treatment for cancer, had failed to eliminate violations of contracting policies.

Dr. Jones’s removal has since swelled into a storm that has seen students become protest organizers and incited legislative efforts to remake the state’s approach to overseeing its public universities.

“There’s been some basic disagreement for some time between the chancellor and some members of the board, but I’m still just bewildered that the board would take such drastic, radical action without more justification,” said William Winter, a former governor who this week tried unsuccessfully to broker a compromise. “It seemed to be a matter that could have been worked out, that could have been avoided, and the result, I think, is detrimental, not just to the University of Mississippi but to all of higher education in Mississippi.”

The resistance has been wide ranging. The alumni association’s leadership said Dr. Jones’s ouster was “unexpected and distressing,” and the Faculty Senate unanimously declared that it was “shocked and extremely disappointed.” On Monday, the student newspaper, The Daily Mississippian, published a front-page editorial supporting Dr. Jones. The Gertrude C. Ford Foundation, which had agreed to spend $20 million for a new science building, said it would withdraw its contribution unless Dr. Jones remained chancellor, the foundation’s president, Anthony T. Papa, said Wednesday.

But the most comprehensive act of dissent was Wednesday’s rally.

“There has been a stigma attached to Ole Miss with all of our history,” said Elizabeth Romary, a sophomore. “But with Dan Jones, all of the positive things that have happened here completely overshadow it, and I think that stigma is basically gone. I’m so proud to call Ole Miss my school, and he’s been a big part of that.”

Political movements are rare here, and several faculty members said the largest protest they could recall in recent decades was connected to beer sales. The turmoil this week, though, has invited comparisons to the 2012 uproar at the University of Virginia after its board forced the resignation of President Teresa A. Sullivan. (Dr. Sullivan was ultimately reinstated and is scheduled to be the commencement speaker here in May.)

But Alan W. Perry, the vice president of the board that governs Mississippi’s public universities, said trustees had acted in an effort to improve management and follow purchasing rules and bookkeeping standards at the university’s medical center.

“I’m paying attention to what people think,” Mr. Perry said. “I’m trying to do my fiduciary duty as best I can.”

After an executive session on Monday, Mr. Perry had described the trustees’ misgivings with the chancellor.

“Dr. Jones knew of our concerns,” Mr. Perry said during a board meeting on Monday. “And that led to a decision that the most practical way to deal with — and maybe the only practical way — to deal with this was to make a change in the institutional head.”

In an interview on Tuesday, Dr. Jones acknowledged repeated clashes with trustees. But he said the board’s explanation for his departure “seemed an unreasonable cause for not renewing my contract.”

“It leaves me wondering what is in the minds and hearts of board members to lead them to make the decision,” said Dr. Jones, who rejected the trustees’ request that he retire early.

There is widespread speculation here about the board’s reasoning, but very little substantive information to suggest another motive for Dr. Jones’s ouster.

“It has all the trappings of the good old boy, Southern cliché of decision-making,” said John Currence, the Mississippi chef who runs four of Oxford’s best regarded restaurants. “It’s so cloaked in mystery. There’s so little transparency.”

Mr. Perry, who said talk of impropriety by the board was “a distraction and a smoke screen,” did not rule out that the trustees could reverse their decision.

But to many people here, the controversy has already had a negative effect.

“We go from pride and unanimity to a pretty uncertain future and one that may put us back in the same reactionary cycles that have characterized the history of the university and the state,” said Jake McGraw, an alumnus and the editor of the Rethink Mississippi blog. “For people who love Ole Miss, it’s going to be an emotional struggle for them to feel the same amount of pride.”