Rev. Lyle E. Schaller Dies at 91; Helped Protestant Churches Survive and Grow
The Rev. Lyle E. Schaller, whose half-century of practical advice on how Protestant congregations could grow — from installing air-conditioning to encouraging pastors to critique their videotaped sermons — made him the nation’s dean of church consultants, died on March 18 in Oklahoma City. He was 91.

His death was caused by heart failure, his son Bruce said.

Mr. Schaller had published 55 books since 1964, edited 41 more and visited an estimated 6,000 churches across the country. His work advising vulnerable parishes on how they could overcome generational and demographic challenges made him the most influential figure among Protestant church leaders, according to an authoritative poll conducted in the late 1980s by William McKinney, a sociologist at the Hartford Seminary in Connecticut.

The runners-up included the Rev. Henri J. M. Nouwen, the writer; Martin E. Marty, the religious historian; Robert McAfee Brown, the theologian; and the Rev. Billy Graham, the evangelist.

Armed with research and anecdotal evidence, Mr. Schaller offered churches advice on matters ranging from the spiritual to the mundane, recommending, for example, that they provide more restrooms or off-street parking. He once described music as the most divisive church issue, suggesting that pastors deliver the same sermon at separate services, one with classical music for more traditional congregants and another with a more clangorous and secular accompaniment, to draw a younger crowd.

He rarely equivocated. He remembered leaders of an urban church with an aging congregation in a changing neighborhood asking how it could grow. “What they really mean is, ‘How can we turn the clock back to 1954?’ ” he told The Chicago Tribune in 1990.

An ordained Methodist minister, Mr. Schaller was religious but also irreverent, typically sporting provocative T-shirts emblazoned with instructive illustrations, witty axioms or texts. Not all his tracts were biblical. An anatomical picture of a colon was featured on one favorite shirt to make the point that a colonoscopy had detected his colon cancer and saved his life and to encourage others to have the procedure.

Warren Bird, research director of the Leadership Network, which advises large congregations, recalled on the organization’s website a conclave of pastors at which one minister described Mr. Schaller as “George Gallup without the numbers, having an uncanny pulse on what churches are like.” Another called him the church version of Peter Drucker, the management guru.

“More recently United Methodist pastor Charles Anderson likened Schaller to today’s social media. ‘For me, reading or listening to Schaller is like a precursor to Twitter: Schaller could always deliver profound ideas and predictions in 140 characters or less, ” Mr. Bird said.

In one of his homespun prescriptions, Mr. Schaller said: “Do not mistake politeness for agreement. People have a natural tendency to avoid disagreement or unpleasantness, and nowhere is this more prevalent than in the local church.”

Lyle Edwin Schaller was born on his family’s dairy farm in Lime Ridge, Wis., on April 19, 1923, to Walter Schaller and the former Mathilda Cepek. In keeping with family tradition, his older brother inherited the farm; Lyle had to find a job. World War II intervened. He trained as an aerial photographer in Nashville, where in 1945 he met and married Agnes Woods Peterson. She survives him, as do his son Bruce and three other sons, Walter and David Schaller and Sasha Alyson; two daughters, Rebecca Schaller and Elia Woods; and five grandchildren.

After the war, Mr. Schaller earned a bachelor’s degree and three Master of Science degrees, including one in city planning, from the University of Wisconsin and a divinity degree from what is now known as Garrett-Evangelical Theological Seminary in Evanston, Ill. He was a student pastor in the Methodist Church and ordained.

After working as a planner and budget officer for the city of Madison, he was asked by the departing mayor to enter the race to succeed him. He declined, because, he said, “My opinion was that anyone who didn’t drink beer could not be elected mayor of Madison.”

Instead he became the first director of the Regional Church Planning Office in Cleveland and then spent three years at the Evangelical Theological Seminary in Naperville, Ill. He spent the rest of his career writing books for Abingdon Press and consulting and conducting workshops through the Yokefellow Institute in Richmond, Ind.

Highlights of his works appear in Mr. Bird’s “The Wisdom of Lyle E. Schaller: The Elder Statesman of Church Leadership.”

While his audiences typically dressed respectfully in business attire, he preferred his characteristic T-shirts. “If you want a taste of religion, bite a preacher,” one said. Another cautioned, “87% of Statistics Are Made Up on the Spur of the Moment.”

“Question Authority” was emblazoned on the front of another favorite. At an opportune moment, Mr. Schaller would turn around and reveal the message on the back: “And When Authority Answers, Listen.”