U.S. Gives Up Another Late Goal in Exhibition Tie at Switzerland
ZURICH — Leading by one goal at halftime against Switzerland, U.S. coach Jurgen Klinsmann warned his players: "never joke with an Italian referee."

They didn't listen.

Jozy Altidore was ejected in the 68th minute for a foul followed by what appeared to be a profane comment to Italian referee Luca Banti, and the United States gave up another late goal in a 1-1 tie Tuesday night.

Brek Shea put the U.S. ahead in the 45th minute, his fourth international goal and the first for the Americans on a free kick since Altidore in August 2013.

The game turned when Altidore fouled Francois Moubandje from behind, earning a yellow card. When Altidore yelled at Luca Banti, the 25-year-old forward was shown a red card.

"I want to apologize to our fans and my teammates," Altidore said in a statement issued through the U.S. Soccer Federation. "Emotion got the best of me, and I put our team in a tough position. That's not the type of role model I want to be. All credit to the boys for grinding it out and earning a positive result."

Twelfth-ranked Switzerland tied it in the 80th following a short corner kick. Granit Xhaka crossed into the penalty area, and defenders Timmy Chandler and Alfredo Morales both tried to head the ball away. It bounced off them and to the turf, and substitute Valentin Stocker scored from 2 yards against goalkeeper William Yarbrough, who came in at the start of the second half for his national team debut. Stocker had not scored for the national team in four years.

The 32nd-ranked Americans have one win in their last eight games and have been outscored 12-1 during the second half since the World Cup — while outscoring opponents 11-3 in the first half. In its last 13 matches, the U.S. has conceded 13 goals from the 80th minute on.

"It might be a theme but it's not a problem," Klinsmann said. "In some games, we kind of ran out of gas earlier and then made individual mistakes, or maybe now this was a purely individual mistake, had nothing to do now with the physical condition, which is good."

The U.S., outshot 12-6, had an excellent chance in the 27th minute when Alejandro Bedoya centered for Michael Bradley, who put an open 7-yard shot over the crossbar.

Shea's goal, from 22 yards, followed a foul by Gokhan Inler. Goalkeeper Roman Buerki hardly moved as the ball curled into the net.

"Jozy was going to take it, and I just kind of told him it was more suited for a left-footed player," Shea said. "He backed off and said, 'Go right ahead.'"

Danny Williams got his first start for the U.S. since Feb. 6, 2013, against Honduras. He had not played since March 5 last year against Ukraine. Shea replaced Greg Garza at left back, Williams and Morales started in midfield, and Gyasi Zardes moved up to forward.

Midfielder Fabian Johnson and forward Aron Johannsson, both ill, were dropped from the starting lineup.

Preparing to defend its title at the CONCACAF Gold Cup this summer, the U.S. next plays Mexico on April 15 in San Antonio.

"To be able to stick together, have a strong mentality and still find ways to come away with results in these kinds of games is very important," Bradley said. "I thought that part was very good."